README.md, before:

# Clocktopus Self-Hosted GitHub Runner

This repository contains a Docker packaging of the GitHub Actions self-hosted runner that can live on the internal host alongside the Clocktopus containers. The runner phones out to GitHub, listens for workflow jobs, and can execute your existing `deploy.sh` scripts located in `apps/clocktopus-*`.

## What's inside

- `docker/Dockerfile` – builds the runner image on top of Ubuntu 22.04.
- `docker/docker-compose.yml` – spins up the runner container, mounting the Clocktopus deployment directories and Docker socket.
- `docker/envs/runner.env.example` – template for the environment variables the runner needs.
- `scripts/entrypoint.sh` – registers the runner with GitHub and starts the service.
- `examples/clocktopus-deploy.yml` – sample workflow to drop into the Clocktopus repo.

## Prerequisites

1. Docker and Docker Compose installed on the host machine.
2. Network access from the host to `github.com` over HTTPS (port 443).
3. Access to generate a **repository** or **organization** self-hosted runner registration token in GitHub (`Settings ▸ Actions ▸ Runners`). Tokens expire after one hour; fetch a fresh one each time you need to (re-)register.
4. The Clocktopus deployment directories available on the host (default assumption: `/home/artificialcrafts/apps/clocktopus-*`). Adjust the mount path via `HOST_APPS_PATH` in your chosen env file if your layout differs.

## Quick start

1. Clone this repository onto the internal host that can reach the Clocktopus Docker daemon and deployment scripts.
2. Create an environment file under `docker/envs/` based on the template and fill in the values:

   ```bash
   cp docker/envs/runner.env.example docker/envs/clocktopus.env
   # Edit docker/envs/clocktopus.env and add your credentials
   ```

   - `RUNNER_URL` should point to the GitHub repository that owns the workflows (e.g. `https://github.com/your-org/clocktopus`).
   - Provide either a short-lived `RUNNER_TOKEN` from the GitHub UI/API **or** set `GITHUB_PAT` to a Personal Access Token with `repo` + `admin:repo_hook` (for repos) or `admin:org` (for org runners). When `GITHUB_PAT` is present the container auto-requests fresh registration/removal tokens on every start/stop.
   - `RUNNER_LABELS` defaults to `self-hosted,linux,deploy`. Workflows must request these labels.
   - `HOST_APPS_PATH` should match the directory on the host where your environments live (e.g. `/home/artificialcrafts/apps`).

3. Build and start the runner container (from the repository root) using the helper script, which takes care of exporting the env values and invoking `docker-compose`:

   ```bash
   chmod +x scripts/runner.sh          # one time
   RUNNER_ENV_FILE=envs/clocktopus.env ./scripts/runner.sh build   # optional, forces a rebuild
   RUNNER_ENV_FILE=envs/clocktopus.env ./scripts/runner.sh start
   ```

   (If you omit `RUNNER_ENV_FILE`, the script defaults to `envs/clocktopus.env`. Reuse the same prefix for subsequent commands or export it in your shell.)

   The container keeps a persistent work directory in `./docker/work` and mounts:

   - `/apps` → `${HOST_APPS_PATH}` on the host (so workflows can run `deploy.sh`).
   - `/var/run/docker.sock` → the host Docker socket (optional, but useful if `deploy.sh` manipulates Docker).

4. Watch the logs the first time to confirm successful registration and job execution:

   ```bash
   RUNNER_ENV_FILE=envs/clocktopus.env ./scripts/runner.sh logs github-runner
   ```

   If you see `Permission denied` errors for `/runner/_work/_tool`, make sure the host work directory is writable by UID 1000 (the runner user):

   ```bash
   sudo chown -R 1000:1000 docker/work
   sudo chmod -R u+rwX docker/work
   ```

5. If you did not supply `GITHUB_PAT`, fetch a fresh registration token each time you restart the container, update your chosen env file, and run:

   ```bash
   RUNNER_ENV_FILE=envs/clocktopus.env ./scripts/runner.sh restart
   ```

   If `GITHUB_PAT` is set you can simply rerun the script— it will request new registration/removal tokens automatically. For ephemeral runners (new registration per job), uncomment `RUNNER_EPHEMERAL=true` in the env file.

### Fetching tokens via CLI

- GitHub CLI: `gh auth login` (once) then `gh repo runnertoken your-org/clocktopus` to print a fresh registration token, or `gh api --method POST repos/your-org/clocktopus/actions/runners/registration-token --jq .token`.
- cURL: `curl -s -X POST -H "Authorization: Bearer $GITHUB_PAT" -H "Accept: application/vnd.github+json" https://api.github.com/repos/your-org/clocktopus/actions/runners/registration-token | jq -r .token`.
- Replace `repos/...` with `orgs/<org>` if you register an organization-level runner.

## Managing the runner container

Use `scripts/runner.sh` for day-to-day operations:

- `RUNNER_ENV_FILE=envs/clocktopus.env ./scripts/runner.sh start` – start the runner
- `RUNNER_ENV_FILE=envs/clocktopus.env ./scripts/runner.sh restart` – restart with fresh tokens
- `RUNNER_ENV_FILE=envs/clocktopus.env ./scripts/runner.sh stop` – stop and remove the container/network
- `RUNNER_ENV_FILE=envs/clocktopus.env ./scripts/runner.sh logs [service]` – tail logs (defaults to `github-runner`)
- `RUNNER_ENV_FILE=envs/clocktopus.env ./scripts/runner.sh build` – rebuild the image with the latest entrypoint changes

Omit `RUNNER_ENV_FILE=…` if you keep the default `docker/envs/clocktopus.env`. The script auto-sources the env file so the container always receives the correct `RUNNER_URL`, labels, and PAT.

## Example workflow for the Clocktopus repo

Add a workflow similar to [`examples/clocktopus-deploy.yml`](examples/clocktopus-deploy.yml) to the Clocktopus repository (e.g. `.github/workflows/deploy.yml`):

```yaml
name: Deploy Clocktopus

on:
  workflow_dispatch:
    inputs:
      target:
        description: "Environment to deploy"
        required: true
        default: development
        type: choice
        options: [development, next, main]
  push:
    branches:
      - next
      - main

jobs:
  deploy:
    runs-on: [self-hosted, linux, deploy]
    steps:
      - name: Determine target path
        id: pick
        run: |
          if [[ "${GITHUB_EVENT_NAME}" == "workflow_dispatch" ]]; then
            target="${{ github.event.inputs.target }}"
          else
            target="${GITHUB_REF_NAME}"
          fi

          case "${target}" in
            development) echo "PATH=/apps/clocktopus-development" >> "$GITHUB_OUTPUT" ;;
            next)        echo "PATH=/apps/clocktopus-next" >> "$GITHUB_OUTPUT" ;;
            main)        echo "PATH=/apps/clocktopus" >> "$GITHUB_OUTPUT" ;;
            *)
              echo "Unsupported deployment target '${target}'" >&2
              exit 1
              ;;
          esac

      - name: Checkout repository (optional)
        uses: actions/checkout@v4

      - name: Run deploy script
        working-directory: ${{ steps.pick.outputs.PATH }}
        run: |
          if [[ ! -x "deploy.sh" ]]; then
            echo "deploy.sh missing or not executable in ${PWD}" >&2
            exit 1
          fi
          ./deploy.sh
```

### Notes

- The workflow relies on the `/apps` mount exposed by the runner container. Adjust the mount or paths if your deployment scripts live elsewhere.
- If your `deploy.sh` script rebuilds Docker images, ensure the runner UID has permission to access the socket. By default the container runs as the `runner` user; you may need to add it to the host Docker group ID (set `group_add` in `docker/docker-compose.yml`).
- Restrict which workflows can target the runner by scoping `RUNNER_URL` to a single repository and assigning unique labels (`runs-on`).
- Consider using GitHub environments with required reviewers/secrets for additional safety gates before deployments.

## Managing updates

- To update the runner version, change `RUNNER_VERSION` in `docker/Dockerfile` and rebuild.
- Keep the host patched and monitor `./scripts/runner.sh logs` for any registration failures.
- Use multiple runner instances (with different `RUNNER_NAME` and `RUNNER_LABELS`) if you need parallel deployments per environment.

Commit message:

docker update to the runner

README.md, after:

# Clocktopus Self-Hosted GitHub Runner

This repository contains a Docker packaging of the GitHub Actions self-hosted runner that can live on the internal host alongside the Clocktopus containers. The runner phones out to GitHub, listens for workflow jobs, and can execute your existing `deploy.sh` scripts located in `apps/clocktopus-*`.

## What's inside

- `docker/Dockerfile` – builds the runner image on top of Ubuntu 22.04.
- `docker/docker-compose.yml` – spins up the runner container, mounting the Clocktopus deployment directories and Docker socket.
- `docker/envs/runner.env.example` – template for the environment variables the runner needs.
- `scripts/entrypoint.sh` – registers the runner with GitHub and starts the service.
- `examples/clocktopus-deploy.yml` – sample workflow to drop into the Clocktopus repo.

## Prerequisites

1. Docker and Docker Compose installed on the host machine.
2. Network access from the host to `github.com` over HTTPS (port 443).
3. Access to generate a **repository** or **organization** self-hosted runner registration token in GitHub (`Settings ▸ Actions ▸ Runners`). Tokens expire after one hour; fetch a fresh one each time you need to (re-)register.
4. The Clocktopus deployment directories available on the host (default assumption: `/home/artificialcrafts/apps/clocktopus-*`). Adjust the mount path via `HOST_APPS_PATH` in your chosen env file if your layout differs.

## Quick start

1. Clone this repository onto the internal host that can reach the Clocktopus Docker daemon and deployment scripts.
2. Create an environment file under `docker/envs/` based on the template and fill in the values:

   ```bash
   cp docker/envs/runner.env.example docker/envs/clocktopus.env
   # Edit docker/envs/clocktopus.env and add your credentials
   ```

   - `RUNNER_URL` should point to the GitHub repository that owns the workflows (e.g. `https://github.com/your-org/clocktopus`).
   - Provide either a short-lived `RUNNER_TOKEN` from the GitHub UI/API **or** set `GITHUB_PAT` to a Personal Access Token with `repo` + `admin:repo_hook` (for repos) or `admin:org` (for org runners). When `GITHUB_PAT` is present the container auto-requests fresh registration/removal tokens on every start/stop.
   - `RUNNER_LABELS` defaults to `self-hosted,linux,deploy`. Workflows must request these labels.
   - `HOST_APPS_PATH` should match the directory on the host where your environments live (e.g. `/home/artificialcrafts/apps`).
   - `HOST_SSH_PATH` should point to the host SSH directory containing a key that GitHub accepts (e.g. `/home/artificialcrafts/.ssh`).

3. Build and start the runner container (from the repository root) using the helper script, which takes care of exporting the env values and invoking `docker-compose`:

   ```bash
   chmod +x scripts/runner.sh          # one time
   RUNNER_ENV_FILE=envs/clocktopus.env ./scripts/runner.sh build   # optional, forces a rebuild
   RUNNER_ENV_FILE=envs/clocktopus.env ./scripts/runner.sh start
   ```

   (If you omit `RUNNER_ENV_FILE`, the script defaults to `envs/clocktopus.env`. Reuse the same prefix for subsequent commands or export it in your shell.)

   The container keeps a persistent work directory in `./docker/work` and mounts:

   - `/apps` → `${HOST_APPS_PATH}` on the host (so workflows can run `deploy.sh`).
   - `/var/run/docker.sock` → the host Docker socket (optional, but useful if `deploy.sh` manipulates Docker).
   - `/runner/.ssh` → `${HOST_SSH_PATH}` read-only (so the runner can authenticate to GitHub via SSH for `git pull`).

4. Watch the logs the first time to confirm successful registration and job execution:

   ```bash
   RUNNER_ENV_FILE=envs/clocktopus.env ./scripts/runner.sh logs github-runner
   ```

   If you see `Permission denied` errors for `/runner/_work/_tool`, make sure the host work directory is writable by UID 1000 (the runner user):

   ```bash
   sudo chown -R 1000:1000 docker/work
   sudo chmod -R u+rwX docker/work
   ```

   Ensure `${HOST_SSH_PATH}` contains an SSH key that GitHub trusts (account key or deploy key) and that `known_hosts` already lists `github.com` (e.g. `ssh-keyscan github.com >> ${HOST_SSH_PATH}/known_hosts`). The runner image bundles the Docker CLI, buildx, and compose plugins so it can drive the host Docker engine via the mounted socket.

5. If you did not supply `GITHUB_PAT`, fetch a fresh registration token each time you restart the container, update your chosen env file, and run:

   ```bash
   RUNNER_ENV_FILE=envs/clocktopus.env ./scripts/runner.sh restart
   ```

   If `GITHUB_PAT` is set you can simply rerun the script— it will request new registration/removal tokens automatically. For ephemeral runners (new registration per job), uncomment `RUNNER_EPHEMERAL=true` in the env file.

### Fetching tokens via CLI

- GitHub CLI: `gh auth login` (once) then `gh repo runnertoken your-org/clocktopus` to print a fresh registration token, or `gh api --method POST repos/your-org/clocktopus/actions/runners/registration-token --jq .token`.
- cURL: `curl -s -X POST -H "Authorization: Bearer $GITHUB_PAT" -H "Accept: application/vnd.github+json" https://api.github.com/repos/your-org/clocktopus/actions/runners/registration-token | jq -r .token`.
- Replace `repos/...` with `orgs/<org>` if you register an organization-level runner.

## Managing the runner container

Use `scripts/runner.sh` for day-to-day operations:

- `RUNNER_ENV_FILE=envs/clocktopus.env ./scripts/runner.sh start` – start the runner
- `RUNNER_ENV_FILE=envs/clocktopus.env ./scripts/runner.sh restart` – restart with fresh tokens
- `RUNNER_ENV_FILE=envs/clocktopus.env ./scripts/runner.sh stop` – stop and remove the container/network
- `RUNNER_ENV_FILE=envs/clocktopus.env ./scripts/runner.sh logs [service]` – tail logs (defaults to `github-runner`)
- `RUNNER_ENV_FILE=envs/clocktopus.env ./scripts/runner.sh build` – rebuild the image with the latest entrypoint changes

Omit `RUNNER_ENV_FILE=…` if you keep the default `docker/envs/clocktopus.env`. The script auto-sources the env file so the container always receives the correct `RUNNER_URL`, labels, and PAT.

## Example workflow for the Clocktopus repo

Add a workflow similar to [`examples/clocktopus-deploy.yml`](examples/clocktopus-deploy.yml) to the Clocktopus repository (e.g. `.github/workflows/deploy.yml`):

```yaml
name: Deploy Clocktopus

on:
  workflow_dispatch:
    inputs:
      target:
        description: "Environment to deploy"
        required: true
        default: development
        type: choice
        options: [development, next, main]
  push:
    branches:
      - next
      - main

jobs:
  deploy:
    runs-on: [self-hosted, linux, deploy]
    steps:
      - name: Determine target path
        id: pick
        run: |
          if [[ "${GITHUB_EVENT_NAME}" == "workflow_dispatch" ]]; then
            target="${{ github.event.inputs.target }}"
          else
            target="${GITHUB_REF_NAME}"
          fi

          case "${target}" in
            development) echo "PATH=/apps/clocktopus-development" >> "$GITHUB_OUTPUT" ;;
            next)        echo "PATH=/apps/clocktopus-next" >> "$GITHUB_OUTPUT" ;;
            main)        echo "PATH=/apps/clocktopus" >> "$GITHUB_OUTPUT" ;;
            *)
              echo "Unsupported deployment target '${target}'" >&2
              exit 1
              ;;
          esac

      - name: Checkout repository (optional)
        uses: actions/checkout@v4

      - name: Run deploy script
        working-directory: ${{ steps.pick.outputs.PATH }}
        run: |
          if [[ ! -x "deploy.sh" ]]; then
            echo "deploy.sh missing or not executable in ${PWD}" >&2
            exit 1
          fi
          ./deploy.sh
```

### Notes

- The workflow relies on the `/apps` mount exposed by the runner container. Adjust the mount or paths if your deployment scripts live elsewhere.
- If your `deploy.sh` script rebuilds Docker images, ensure the runner UID has permission to access the socket. By default the container runs as the `runner` user; you may need to add it to the host Docker group ID (set `group_add` in `docker/docker-compose.yml`).
- Restrict which workflows can target the runner by scoping `RUNNER_URL` to a single repository and assigning unique labels (`runs-on`).
- Consider using GitHub environments with required reviewers/secrets for additional safety gates before deployments.

## Managing updates

- To update the runner version, change `RUNNER_VERSION` in `docker/Dockerfile` and rebuild.
- Keep the host patched and monitor `./scripts/runner.sh logs` for any registration failures.
- Use multiple runner instances (with different `RUNNER_NAME` and `RUNNER_LABELS`) if you need parallel deployments per environment.
